# Group theory

## Groups

Group $G$ is a set with an operation $*$ which

* is closed, i.e.\ $\forall a, b \in G\colon a * b \in G$
* has an identity $e$, i.e.\ $\forall a \in G\colon i*a = a*i = a$
* is associative, i.e. $\forall a, b, c \in G\colon a * (b * c)  = (a * b) * c$
* every element $a$ has an inverse $a^{-1}$, i.e.\ $\forall a \in G\colon a * a^{-1} = a^{-1} * a = e$

Abelian or commutative group is a group where the underlying operation works in a commutative manner, i.e.
\begin{equation}
  \forall a, b \in G\colon a * b = b * a
\end{equation}

In additive groups, identity element is denoted by $0$, while in multiplicative groups it is denoted by $1$.

Order of a group is the number of elements in it.

## Subgroups

Subgroup $H$ is a subset of group $G$ and is itself a group. It is denoted by
\begin{equation}
  H \leq G
\end{equation}

Any group $G$ is also a subgroup of itself. If $H$ is a subgroup of $G$ but not the same as $G$, it is called a proper subgroup. It is denoted by
\begin{equation}
  H < G
\end{equation}

## Cayley tables

Features:

* if identity is the first element in the row and column headers, the first row and column are just repeats of the headers
* every column contains the identity (because every element in group has an inverse)
* for abelian groups, the table is symmetric around the diagonal
* no duplicate elements in rows or columns

*Proof for last statement:*

Assume there's a row $a$ with duplicate elements $z$ corresponding to two columns $x$ and $y$. Then
\begin{align*}
  a * x &= a * y \\
  a^{-1} * (a * x) &= a^{-1} * (a * y) \\
  (a^{-1} * a) * x &= (a^{-1} * a) * y \\
  e * x &= e * y \\
  x &= y
\end{align*}
But $x$ and $y$ are different---a contradiction. Thus, rows don't have duplicate elements. Analogous proof for showing no duplicate elements in columns.

Using Cayley tables, we can show that there is one group of order 1, one group of order 2, one group of order 3, and 2 (distinct) groups of order 4.

## Cyclic groups

Cyclic group is a group that is generated by a single element $a$, i.e.\ every element is a power of $a$ is a power of $a$ if the group is multiplicative or a multiple of $a$ if the group is additive.

Multiplicative generator $\langle g \rangle$ is given by
\begin{equation}
  \langle g \rangle \equiv  \{\ldots, x^{-2}, x^{-1}, 1, x^1, x^2, \ldots\}
\end{equation}

Additive generator $\langle g \rangle$ is given by
\begin{equation}
  \langle g \rangle \equiv  \{\ldots, -2x, -x, 0, x, 2x, \ldots\}
\end{equation}

Integers $\mathbb{Z}$ are a cyclic group under addition because
\begin{equation}
  \langle 1 \rangle = \{\ldots, -2 \times 1, -1 \times 1, 0, 1 \times 1, 2 \times 1, \ldots\}
\end{equation}

## Rings

Ring is an abelian group whose (primary) operation $+$ is called addition, and which has a secondary binary operation $\cdot$ called multiplication which

* is closed
* is associative
* is distributive over the addition operation, i.e.\ $\forall a, b, c \in G\colon a \cdot (b + c) = a \cdot b + a \cdot c$

Most definitions of a ring also require multiplication to have an identity.
